---
title: Curious Case of Widening
author: Sreekumar T
keywords: [Widening-narrowing-conversion, primitive-data-types, overflow, java, streams, long, integer]
---

# Curious Case of Widening

Recently, we undertook the task of refactoring some code. We came across a piece of code Like this (excerpt for illustration purposes):

```
List<Integer> arr = Arrays.asList(Integer.MAX_VALUE,1);  
long sum = 0L;  
for(int i: arr) {  
  sum = sum + i;  
}  
```


It was simply summing up the array list elements and storing them in a variable sum.  
The output was **2147483648**.  

Note,that the variable sum is of data type long, already anticipating the overflow of sum beyond the int max value.  
While refactoring the above code using lambdas and streams,the reduce operation was used.  


```
long sum = arr.stream().reduce(0, (a, b) -> a + b);
```


What would be the expected output? Is it **2147483648** ?  

Well, the output was **-2147483648**, which is minimum value of int data type -2<sup>31</sup>.  

**The int datatype's supported value ranges between -2<sup>31</sup> to 2<sup>31</sup>-1.**  

So what went wrong here? Even though we have the sum of type long to handle the int overflow.  


In the original code, when we were adding up the elements, <b>the right-hand-side has a long variable in the expression hence int i undergoes a widening primitive conversion to long</b> for each iteration.**[JLS8 jls-5.6.2]**.  
However, in the second example, **the lambda expression parameters a and b are both of type integers, and the intermediate result is stored in an integer as well**, effectively causing overflow on exceeding the maximum limit of 32-bit for int data type.  


To fix it, we can go about it in many ways.  
In this case, since we have already used the reduce operation, the elements of the stream were converted to long using maptoLong before the reduce operation.  

```
long sum =  arr.stream().maptoLong(a -> a).reduce(0, (a, b) -> a + b);
```  

Hopefully, this gives an insight into the pitfalls of overflow.  

Keep practicing and keep growing.  
Thank you everyone.  
